[DOC] Add new documentation for date index name processor (#5398)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _ingest-pipelines/processors/date-index-name.md

---
layout: default
title: Date index name
parent: Ingest processors
nav_order: 55
---

# Date index name

The `date_index_name` processor is used to point documents to the correct index based on the date or timestamp field within the document. The processor can be used for purposes such as log retention and index partitioning.

The following is the syntax for the `date_index_name` processor:

```json
{
  "date_index_name": {
    "field": "date_field or timestamp_field",
    "date_rounding": "M"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Configuration parameters

The following table lists the required and optional parameters for the `date_index_name` processor.

Parameter | Required | Description |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|

> `field`  | Required  | The date or timestamp field in the incoming document. <Supports [template snippets]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets).> |

Reviewer: Missing parameter? `index_name_prefix`?

Author: Is this parameter an option? Here's a screenshot of the autopopulate options when using the Dev Tools console.
<img width="694" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-07 at 5 11 33 PM" src="https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/assets/105296784/332f76c0-ee40-4b37-a3e3-a7e4b183bba9">

Reviewer: It is an optional parameter.

It is recommended that you test your pipeline before you ingest documents.
{: .tip}

To test the pipeline, run the following query:

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/date-index-name1/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "@timestamp": "2023-10-30T12:43:29.000Z"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

The following example response confirms that the pipeline is working as expected:

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "<{2023-10||/M{yyyy-MM|UTC}}>",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "@timestamp": "2023-10-30T12:43:29.000Z"
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2023-10-30T18:57:41.674876009Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

**Step 3: Ingest a document.**

The following query ingests a document into an index named `testindex1`:

```json
PUT testindex1/_doc/1?pipeline=date-index-name1
{
  "@timestamp": "2023-10-30T12:43:29.000Z"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Step 4 (Optional): Retrieve the document.**

To retrieve the document, run the following query:

```json
GET testindex1/_doc/1
```

> {% include copy-curl.html %}

Reviewer: Where is the response?

Author: Added the following response:

{
  "_index": "testindex1",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 56,
  "_seq_no": 55,
  "_primary_term": 29,
  "found": true,
  "_source": {
    "response_code": "200",
    "http_method": "POST",
    "http_version": "HTTP/1.1",
    "client_ip": "192.168.1.10",
    "message": """192.168.1.10 - - [03/Nov/2023:15:20:45 +0000] "POST /login HTTP/1.1" 200 3456""",
    "url": "/login",
    "response_size": "3456",
    "timestamp": "03/Nov/2023:15:20:45 +0000"
  }
}

Reviewer: This is not correct. If you are using date index name processor, the document won't goes to the index you specified, `testindex1`,  but to `2023-10` in this case. Please test it locally.

Reviewer 2: Here's the response:
```
{
  "_index": "week_index-2023-10-30",
  "_id": "1",
  "_version": 1,
  "result": "created",
  "_shards": {
    "total": 2,
    "successful": 1,
    "failed": 0
  },
  "_seq_no": 0,
  "_primary_term": 1
}
```

Reviewer 2: The document goes into the `week_index-2023-10-30` index

Author: Thank you @kolchfa-aws. I put in the GET response, not the PUT response in step 3. I can see the response you provided.

Reviewer: @vagimeli. You need to GET `week_index-2023-10-30` but not `testindex1`. The document in `testindex1` should have been index during other testing.

The following is the syntax for the `date_index_name` processor:

```json
{
  "date_index_name": {
    "field": "your_date_field or your_timestamp_field",
    "date_rounding": "rounding_value"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Configuration parameters

The following table lists the required and optional parameters for the `date_index_name` processor.

Parameter | Required/Optional | Description |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|
`field`  | Required  | The date or timestamp field in the incoming document. Supports [template snippets]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets). |
`date_rounding`  | Required | The rounded date format within the index name . Valid values are `y` (year), `M` (month), `w` (week), `d` (day), `h` (hour), `m` (minute), and `s` (second). |

> `date_formats` | Optional | An array of date formats to parse the date or timestamp field. Default is `yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss.SSSXX`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`date_formats` | Optional | An array of date formats used to parse the date or timestamp field. Valid options include a java time pattern or one of the following formats: ISO8601, UNIX, UNIX_MS, or TAI64N. Default is `yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss.SSSXX`. |
```

> `index_name_format` | Optional | The date format. Default is empty value. | Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`index_name_format` | Optional | The date format. Default is `yyyy-MM-dd`. Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets). |
```

> `index_name_prefix` | Optional | The index name prefix to add before the date. Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`index_name_prefix` | Optional | The index name prefix to append before the date. Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets).
```

`description`  | Optional  | A brief description of the processor.  |
`if` | Optional | A condition for running this processor. |
`ignore_failure` | Optional | If set to `true`, failures are ignored. Default is `false`. |

> `locale` | `locale`  | Optional  | The locale to use when parsing the date. Default is `ENGLISH`. Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets).  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`locale` | `locale`  | Optional  | The locale to use when parsing the month name and week day of the date. Default is `ENGLISH`. Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets).  |
```

`on_failure` | Optional | A list of processors to run if the processor fails. |
`tag` | Optional | An identifier tag for the processor. Useful for debugging to distinguish between processors of the same type. |

> `timezone`  | Optional  | The time zone to use when parsing the date. Default is `UTC`. Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`timezone`  | Optional  | The time zone to use when parsing the date. Default is `UTC`. |
```

        "date_rounding": "w",
        "date_formats": ["YYYY-MM-DD"]
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

**Step 2 (Optional): Test the pipeline.**

It is recommended that you test your pipeline before you ingest documents.
{: .tip}

To test the pipeline, run the following query:

```json
POST _ingest/pipeline/date-index-name1/_simulate
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "_index": "testindex1",
      "_id": "1",
      "_source": {
        "date_field": "2023-10-30"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

The following example response confirms that the pipeline is working as expected:

```json
{
  "docs": [
    {
      "doc": {
        "_index": "<week_index-{2023-10-01||/w{yyyy-MM-dd|UTC}}>",
        "_id": "1",
        "_source": {
          "date_field": "2023-10-30"
        },
        "_ingest": {
          "timestamp": "2023-11-13T18:23:10.408593092Z"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

**Step 3: Ingest a document.**

The following query ingests a document into an index named `testindex1`:

```json
PUT testindex1/_doc/1?pipeline=date-index-name1
{
  "date_field": "2023-10-30"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

#### Response

> The request indexes the document into the index `week_index-2023-10-23` and will continue to index documents into weekly indexes because the pipeline rounds by week.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The request indexes the document into the index `week_index-2023-10-23` and will index all documents with a timestamp within that week into the same index because the pipeline rounds by week.
```

---
layout: default
title: Date index name
parent: Ingest processors
nav_order: 55
---

# Date index name

> The `date_index_name` processor is used to point documents to the correct time-based index based on the date or timestamp field within the document. The processor sets the `_index` metadata field to a [date math]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/date/#date-math) index name expression. Then the processor fetches the date or timestamp from the `field` field in the document being processed and formats it into a date math index name expression. The date math index name expression is based on the `index_name_prefix` and the `date_rounding`. For example, if the `field` field contains the value `2023-11-10-10T08:31:45Z` and the `date_rounding` field is set to `d`, then the date math index name expression is `my_index-2023-11-10`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `date_index_name` processor is used to point documents to the correct time-based index based on the date or timestamp field within the document. The processor sets the `_index` metadata field to a [date math]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/date/#date-math) index name expression. Then the processor fetches the date or timestamp from the `field` field in the document being processed and formats it into a date math index name expression. The date math index name expression is based on the `index_name_prefix` and the `date_rounding`. For example, if the `field` field contains the value `2023-11-10-10T08:31:45Z`, the `index_name_prefix` field is set to `my_index-`, and the `date_rounding` field is set to `d`, then the date math index name expression is `my_index-2023-11-10`.
```

The following is the syntax for the `date_index_name` processor:

```json
{
  "date_index_name": {
    "field": "date_field or timestamp_field",
    "date_rounding": "M"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Configuration parameters

The following table lists the required and optional parameters for the `date_index_name` processor.

Parameter | Required/Optional | Description |
|-----------|-----------|-----------|
`field`  | Required  | The date or timestamp field in the incoming document. <Supports [template snippets]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets).> |
`date_rounding`  | Required | The rounded date format within the index name . Valid values are `y` (year), `M` (month), `w` (week), `d` (day), `h` (hour), `m` (minute), and `s` (second). |
`date_formats` | Optional | An array of date formats to parse the date or timestamp field. Default is <yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss.SSSXX>. |
`index_name_format` | Optional | The date format. Default is <MM-dd-yyyy>. | Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets). |

> `index_name_prefix` | Optional | 

Reviewer: description?

> `date_formats` | Optional | An array of date formats to parse the date or timestamp field. Default is <yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss.SSSXX>. |

Author: What is the default date format?

Reviewer: You already has default value. `yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss.SSSXX`

> `index_name_format` | Optional | The date format. Default is <MM-dd-yyyy>. | Supports [template snippets]({site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/create-ingest/#template-snippets). |

Author: What is the default format?

Reviewer: Empty value is default.
